Assignment III Reflection - Will Hopper

This assignment definitely brought a competitive edge to my chess engine. Thanks to
alpha beta pruning as well as my improved score evaluator, even my Ruby bot
can be competitive online aginast its oponents.

The first work I did as part of this assignment was to implement alpha
beta functionality. It was difficult at first to understand exactly how
the algorithm was meant to work, but once I finally managed to modify my
negamax function enough to get AB pruning working, it made quite a lot more
sense. The results are very real, too. Before AB pruning, my engine struggled
to even go 3 levels deep at times in 5-7 seconds. This is not so any more, as
it seems that I can commonly reach 4 levels deep, as such is really the limitation
of my ruby implementation.

Another unexpected modification that I was forced to make was more or less the
temporary decommisioning of my iterative deepening functionality. Once I had
implemented AB pruning, I found that my ID implementation had some serious faults,
and was returning poor moves due to the fact that often it would *think* it was reaching
4 levels deep, but only had time to go one or two. Thus, the score it would return
was only accurate for that many levels, and the moves were poor. In my current
implementation, I've set the engine to try and use as much time as possible to go
3 or 4 levels deep, depending on how much time is left in the match. I've found
that faster, non-Ruby implementations have a serious advantage in this regard, and
as such my bot faces a constant risk of losing by time. This is the only course
that can bring a win online, however, and it often does. As long as I can end the game
within 20-25 moves, I do not run out of time.


The other mos significant improvement that I added for this part of the assignment
was the improved score generator. I was seriously blown away by how much of a
difference this made. My new scoring heuristic accounts for positioning of
rooks, knights, bishops, the queen and the king. As suggested, moving these pieces
out of their home positions has been heightened in score, as have pawns and other 
pieces moving towards the center two rows of the board. It is very interesting to
see how much more aggressive and better these changes have made my engine. Now,
my bot wins at least half of its matches against the bot 'Mcwurst' on the server.
There are certainly more changes that I'd like to make, if I am able to find some
advantaeous moves.
